0.00 - 30.00: - This video is brought
to you by Squarespace, an all-in-one platform
for building your brand and growing your business online. (birds singing) (curtain rattling) (cat meowing) Okay, I watched "The
Idea of You" last night, and very quickly, have any
of you watched this movie? It's relatively new, Anne Hathaway x Nicholas Galitzine. Galitzine, (laughing) Galitzine? Rom-com based on a book where the main character is
inspired by Harry Styles. And I'm not sure what Harry Styles has done cosmically to
deserve this, (laughing)
30.00 - 60.00: but he's been the inspiration for two different
book-to-movie characters now, and it's just so bizarre. I wonder if he's watched
(laughing) any of this stuff. - My favorite thing about the movie is it feels like a movie. It feels like a real film movie. (floor squeaking) (transition beeping and hissing) - [Mina] The movie is
about a 40-year-old mother and a 24-year-old boy band pop star falling in love.
60.00 - 90.00: - I met someone tonight. - And look, I think Miss Annie Hathaway is a phenomenal actress and I cried watching this
movie multiple times. I'm not afraid to admit it. She just plays a sad girl really well, (laughing) and I appreciate it. I eat it up. I remember in my acting classes when we had to emotionally
prepare for sadness, which is to basically get
ourselves in a sad state before entering a scene, I would be backstage playing
her "I Dreamed A Dream," and just in tears.
(forlorn music) (record scratching)
(Mina laughing) I think the acting made
the movie more watchable, but something was off the
whole time (laughing) for me.
90.00 - 120.00: I just couldn't really buy the characterizations of the main couple. So Anne Hathaway's character is supposed to be this
middle-aged divorcee, mother of a high school junior, who owns a successful art gallery, but she's really naive, childish and outwardly unconfident. Nicholas's character is
very emotionally mature and grounded in the real world, despite having been a
world famous pop star since he was 14 years old. I think it's the writer's way of leveling the playing field because the whole point of the movie is that they're in this
15-year-age-gap relationship,
120.00 - 150.00: and in order for it to not seem predatory to us as an audience, Nicholas' character, the younger one, has to have some kind of
leg up on Anne's character to sort of offset the power differential. But it just doesn't
really make a lot of sense (laughing) given their backstories. I still had fun watching it though, even though, I was thinking about it and I haven't gravitated
to a rom-com in a long time because most of the ones that have been made in the past 10 years have been unwatchably bad.
150.00 - 180.00: But ever since "Anyone But You," news outlets have been whispering the idea of a rom-com renaissance in the works. And it seems like they're on to something because I just checked, and "The Idea of You" has
over 80% are rotten tomatoes. So for this video, I
wanna explore the history of romantic comedy movies, the golden age of the '90s and 2000s, and whether or not those movies were even (laughing) that good, what's happened since, and how it all relates to our own views on love and relationships. Let's get started. (birds singing)
(footsteps scratching)
180.00 - 210.00: (record player hissing) - Love is patient, love is kind. Love means slowly losing your mind. (upbeat music) - I'm also just a girl, standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her.
210.00 - 240.00: (record scratching)
- Oh, we're in luck. A rom-com marathon. (transition hissing) - Squarespace offers the best tools for easy website design. Their website design
system called Fluid Engine lets you customize every design detail with this unique drag and drop technology. And you can of course use it to design both your website's
desktop and mobile layouts. Not only can you design a banging website,
240.00 - 270.00: Squarespace has built-in analytics so that you can also track who's coming across
your beautiful new page. Check out page views, traffic sources, time on site, most-read content, audience geography, and more. You can also use Squarespace
to set up a store. There are options to list anything from physical products, to digital downloads, to subscriptions and memberships. Check out squarespace.com
for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, go to squarespace.com/minale to get 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. (transition hissing) (keys clacking) - Now I'm gonna duck out
and get some breakfast.
270.00 - 300.00: - Well, I thought the plan was to stay here and look married. (upbeat music)
(keys clacking) I wanna start in the 1930s, because the 1930s is
when we got the talkies, or movies with sound dialogue. Technically the first talkie
was "The Jazz Singer" in 1927, but we're rounding to the
closest decade, okay? (laughing) Important to note that in the early '20s, societal views towards sex were changing. Premarital sex was
still kind of hush-hush, but people started to view sex as a pleasurable act
between husband and wife,
300.00 - 330.00: and not just an act for procreation. And related the idea of
a companionate marriage was starting to take
hold in the late 1920s over the patriarchal model that ruled the Victorian era. Obviously families were
still pretty patriarchal. Men usually were the breadwinners and domestic abuse was still a problem, is still a problem today, but the general idea was that young people wanted to actually be friends and lovers with their spouses. By the way, that's not to say that people didn't have fun (laughing)
330.00 - 360.00: in their marriages before the 1920s. Dr. Clelia Mosher conducted a survey between 1892 and 1920, and found that a
surprising number of wives actually had healthy sexual
relations with their husbands. But the publicized idea at the time was that procreation was
the utmost importance. Young men and women of the 1920s though took it a step further in radicalizing against
mainstream Protestant ideals. There's a great magazine
called "Flapper Magazine," there's so many good examples of the kind of ideology that
young people had at the time. There was this one November, 1922 issue
360.00 - 390.00: where a contributor wrote, "Why in the Name of common sense do the manufacturers of ladies' clothing insist upon girls wearing long skirts when we simply don't want them? What do they think we are? A bunch of jellyfish with
no minds of our own?" Here, here. (laughing)
(fingers snapping) Heather Glimour wrote
about how romantic comedies of the early 20th century reflected this new ideology. So, romantic comedies of the 1930s are usually referred to as
screwball comedies today. The screwball comedy is a sub-genre of romantic comedy film characterized by physical comedy,
390.00 - 420.00: verbal banter and an
eccentric leading couple. While screwball is kind
of used loosely now, historical trade in popular press actually only used the term to refer to a limited number of comedies released between 1936 and 1938. The earliest usage of the term screwball actually comes from a
1936 "Variety Review" of "My Man Godfrey," which states, "Miss Lombard has played screwball dames before, but none so screwy as
this one." (laughing) Glimour notes the more progressive aspects of the screwball comedy,
420.00 - 450.00: namely the fact that the female characters tended to control the narrative flow. Female characters were usually just as or more economically empowered than the male characters, and children are rarely part of the story, making it possible to focus fully on the couple's relationship as equal individuals and less as a dynamic
between mother and father, which was, especially in the
1930s, steeped in inequality. Glimour writes, "The
couple's childlessness also reflects a historical moment when sex for its own sake and not necessarily for
procreation was acceptable.
450.00 - 480.00: Contraception was
becoming ever-more popular and the rate of childbirth was falling." What I found really interesting when researching screwball comedies is that, in general, the public actually
gave many of these films lukewarm receptions, even "Bringing Up Baby," which is widely considered
a timeless classic today. The main criticism for
the early screwballs was that they were too
nonsensical and bizarre. (leopard shrieking) ♪ Find happiness, and I guess ♪
♪ Find happiness, and I guess ♪ - [Mina] It's a fair assessment.
480.00 - 510.00: But everything changed with
"The Awful Truth" in 1937. Following the success of this movie, screwball comedy writers pivoted their strategy, trading out slapstick humor for suggestive ambiguity in their comedy repertoire. Even though "The Awful Truth" does have its slapstick moments still, the dialogue in the movie was filled with all these
very fun double entendres. - I am a great teacher, not a great lover. - That's right, Armand. No one could ever accuse you of being a great lover. - So in this scene, Lucy's line could be
interpreted as innocent, hinting to the audience
that Armand is a virgin.
510.00 - 540.00: However, there's the
alternative, more fun read that she has already slept
with him premaritally and thinks he's just
bad in bed. (laughing) This became a model for
following screwballs. Also, if you think about it, this is a model for old
children's TV shows as well. There are just so many jokes from shows that I grew up with, like in "SpongeBob SquarePants"- - Patrick, your genius is showing. - Where? - that had double-entendre meanings, which makes them still fun
to revisit as an adult. Like I really appreciate the commitment to making shows that can be enjoyed
540.00 - 570.00: by adults supervising their children too. I don't watch kids' shows anymore, but the general consensus, I've heard, is that the shows that
they're making nowadays are just really not watchable once you're over the age of like eight, which is a shame. TV is a family affair. (laughing) - Well, you don't look so hot yourself. (both laughing) - I should add that the
reason why screwball comedies were so dialogue heavy
and physical comedy laden is because of the
Hollywood production code
570.00 - 600.00: known as the Hays Code, which censored just about everything. Couples were not even allowed
to kiss lying down in movies because it implied they were getting nasty or about to. Film critic, Andrew Sarris, channeling a screenwriter from the 1930s, writes, "Here we have all
these beautiful people with nothing to do. Let us invent some substitutes for sex. The wise cracks multiply beyond measure, and when audiences tire
of verbal sublimation, the performers do cartwheels and pratfalls and make funny expressions." Another popular trope
in the screwball comedy was the re-marriage trope,
600.00 - 630.00: and this also reflected real-life
increasing divorce rates. According to historian
Elaine Tyler May's research, by the end of the 1920s, more than one in six
marriages terminated in court. Between 1910 and 1940, the divorce rate nearly doubled, in spite of a slight
decline in the early 1930s. As David Shumway theorizes
in his book, "Modern Love," "Remarriage became the leading
plot of screwball comedy because divorce had become a common, but still threatening
feature of American life. Screwball comedies respond not so much to the
fears of social collapse articulated by moralists
630.00 - 660.00: as to the fears of individuals about the fate of their own
current or future marriages. The project of the comedies of remarriage is to reaffirm the
romantic view of marriage in the face of its failure." There is many theories as to why divorce was becoming so popular. Some people blame liberal divorce laws, some people blame the general
conditions of urban life and some people claim
that rising expectations of personal happiness put an increased burden on marriage. The expectation, once again, of a happy companionate marriage
660.00 - 690.00: that was at least in part
encouraged by Hollywood. As Shumway writes, "The specific illusion that
the screwball comedy constructs is that one can have both complete desire and complete satisfaction, and that the name for the
state of affairs is marriage." He also notes the patriarchal
undertone of these movies, namely the fact that the usual dynamic is that of a spunky woman and a rational man who tries to tame her. - Hold on there, Susan. Susan, can you hear me there? I'll be there, Susan. (door rattling)
690.00 - 720.00: - Oh. (laughing) - Basically "Taming of the Shrew." Shumway also writes, "There remains an element
of dyadic narrative in many screwball comedies expressed in the frequent importance of the bride's father in spite of his extraneousness to the basic narrative structure." As an example, at the
beginning of the movie, "It Happened One Night," Ellen runs away from her father because he disapproves of
the man she eloped with, setting motion to these course of events where she meets and
eventually develops a romance
720.00 - 750.00: with journalist Peter. And spoiler alert, but you've had like 100 years (laughing) to see this movie. All is well in the end because Ellen's father approves of Peter and they can carry on with their union. - Wanna spend the night in a motel? See what I did? I didn't let it lie. - Harry.
- I said I would and then I didn't.
- Harry. (mouse clicking)
(keys clacking) (upbeat music) The reason why Hollywood
stopped making screwballs can be attributed to a number of factors. One of the big ones that
Kelsey Matson points out
750.00 - 780.00: in her Collider article was World War II. She writes, "After the
US entered World War II, Hollywood's attention shifted to raising funds for the war effort and embodied serious themes
of patriotism and selflessness instead of rambunctious shenanigans. And once the war ended, Americans returning to
their shattered image of suburbia peace found comfort in technicolor melodramas and movie musicals. It's not a huge leap to assume that people wanted more grounded escapism that reflected their changing world, or at least dramas where
the intensely high stakes were serious but fake."
780.00 - 810.00: I would also say that the screwball comedy was very prescriptive. There was a formula
audiences expected to see every time they went to these movies. As I said, there were
lots of somersaulting and dramatic zingy quips and one-liners, but these theatrical comedic techniques have all kind of fallen outta favor with the rise of Stanislavski
acting techniques in the 1950s, such as the method, which strive for realism. So the fervor for a movie that combined romance and
comedy didn't peter out, they just transformed
810.00 - 840.00: to better reflect
people's changing tastes. Over the second half of the 20th century, we started to see the rise of movies that were literally called
romantic comedies, or rom-coms. And the major difference, according to film professor Wes D Gehring in his book "Romantic
vs. Screwball Comedy," is that while still funny, a rom-com is dead serious about the importance of love. As an example of this earnestness, I'll play one of my favorite lines from my favorite romantic comedy, "When Harry Met Sally." - I came here tonight because when you realize you wanna spend the rest
of your life with somebody, you want the rest of your life
840.00 - 870.00: to start as soon as possible. - [Mina] We can compare
this bit of dialogue to a line from "What's Up, Doc?" a 1972 movie, another
fantastic movie by the way, that pays tribute to the
screwball comedy genre. - As the years go by, romance fades and something else takes its place. Do you know what that is? - Senility. - Also fun fact that I
learned when researching, the original draft of
"When Harry Met Sally" actually has the couple, Harry and Sally, not end up together, and this was mostly because
the screenwriter, Nora Ephron, had crafted the character of Harry after director Rob Reiner, and the character of Sally after herself.
870.00 - 900.00: Both of them were divorced and Reiner in particular had written off all romantic prospects after having been single
for a near decade. - Because I'd been married for 10 years, I'd been single for 10 years, and I couldn't figure out how I was ever gonna be with anybody, and that gave birth to
"When Harry Met Sally." - But then Reiner changed the ending when he spontaneously found
love during production. Yeah, Reiner met his second
wife, Michele Singer, while shooting a scene in the movie. She was visiting the set,
900.00 - 930.00: along with her friend, cinematographer Barry
Sonnenfeld's wife, Susan Ringo, and Reiner was so smitten with her that he tagged along to their lunch date. Reiner and Singer ended up marrying before the movie even
came out to theaters. So we can thank Michele Singer for the best romantic comedy
of the millennium. (laughing) The other major factor that separates a romantic
comedy from a screwball comedy is that there is usually
some kind of serious and/or melodramatic circumstance that love has to triumph over. For example, the movie
"Sleepless in Seattle" opens with a funeral,
930.00 - 960.00: and we find out that the
male love interest, Sam, has just become a widowed father. Gehring's other essential
components to a romantic comedy are the believability of its characters and emphasis on a
traditional dating ritual and a propensity for slower story pacing, especially near the end of the film. A lot of people talk about romantic comedy as if it's a dead genre, which is, it's somewhat true. Objectively, there were
just more romantic comedies produced in the '90s and early 2000s than there have been in the past 15 years.
960.00 - 990.00: However, the genre is not completely dead. 2023 produced over 30
new romantic comedies. I just think the ones that exist somehow can't mirror the
success of past ones. I mean, in 1990, "Pretty Woman" was in the top four highest-grossing films of the year, but by 2016, not one romantic comedy made it to the top 50
highest-grossing films in domestic box offices. I do think there's a bit
of a nostalgic factor that plays into this because there were a
handful of romantic comedies I didn't grow up with from the '90s
990.00 - 1020.00: that I later watched as an adult and I do (laughing) think
they were not that good. Not to start fights with anyone, but "Sleepless in Seattle" and "You've Got Male" were major disappointments for me. I thought the whole premise
of "Sleepless in Seattle" was a bit stupid and made Meg Ryan's character
look like a stalker. And then "You've Got Mail" was trying to make the audience ignore the fact that Tom Hanks' character drove Meg Ryan's business to the ground. They tried to get us to root for them as a couple afterwards. It was just so bizarre.
1020.00 - 1050.00: I'm like, (sighing) "He
literally killed her business. Why would I find that
romantic?" (scoffing) But it was cute, it's nostalgic, and I love '90s style, so I'll still watch
it, I guess. (laughing) Also, because of how much
content exists on streaming, it's easier for movies
to get lost in the mix, and I'm sure there's actually
some really great movies that will never get the
same kind of classic status as these earlier rom-coms because no one's watched them. Like "He's All That." (laughing) ♪ La, la, la, la, la, la, la ♪
1050.00 - 1080.00: ♪ La, la, la, la, la, la, la ♪ (transition beeping and hissing) - Just kidding in case
you thought I was serious. ♪ La, la, la, la ♪ - As English professor, Tommy Jenkins, told Technician Online, "This is a generalization, but the '90s were a
last grasp for Hollywood before streaming came into play. Once streaming came into play, it's kinda hard to keep
up with all of the content that's available to us now. In the '90s, it was still like, 'Hey, look at this big romantic comedy.' It's more difficult for
movies to do that now unless they really break through."
1080.00 - 1110.00: Jenkins also says that
today's modern technology removes the possibility
of certain beloved tropes and also ruins some of the
serendipitous magic present in older movies. He explains, "To create
these romantic entanglements in the '90s, you could do all kinds of things where people miscommunicate because everybody (laughing)
didn't have a cellphone. Now it's like, we're texting each other, we're gonna know where everybody is and doing all the time." As Rhea Canon sums up in her
article for Technician Online,
1110.00 - 1140.00: "What we miss in the '90s rom-coms might not be just the stories themselves, but the preservation of what might seem to be a simpler society that by design allowed for more immersive and entertaining stories." Scott Meslow, who wrote the book "From Hollywood With Love." Says, "The decline of rom-com hits can also be explained by
studios' disinvestment in mid-budget movies. The reason studios have shifted away from mid-budget cinema to costly, high-production,
Marvel-type movies is because of, surprise.
(suspenseful drum rolling) Money. (laughing)
(cash register dinging)
1140.00 - 1170.00: There seems to be an attitude these days for studios to go big or go home. In 1990, the inflation-adjusted
average production budget of the top 20-grossing
films was $63 million, but in 2019, it ballooned to $141 million. The reason being that
today's streaming services and social media platforms are competing with Hollywood, and so studios know that
a film must have buzz to be able to bring people into theaters. This is also why they've
been leading on IP material and the same like 15 high-profile actors.
1170.00 - 1200.00: While there is still non-action movies getting produced and
winning awards, for sure, they either fair with smaller
budgets than in the past or they have to strike
a deal with a streamer. For example, the Oscars
2022 Best Picture, "Coda," cost $10 million, and their 2021 winner, "Nomadland," cost five million. Neil Iyer reported for
"Independent Magazine" that Spike Lee's "Da 5
Bloods" cost $40 million, which categorizes it as
a mid-budget feature. "He hoped for an early
2022 theatrical release, but after struggling to secure a deal
1200.00 - 1230.00: with a major studio, he had to partner with Netflix. If a celebrated director like Spike Lee can't find a non-streaming
distribution deal, how will anyone make a studio-backed movie that doesn't feature
Thanos or Green Lantern?" If you noticed, also, these movies that are
greenlit with lower budgets are also award season big movies, dramas and biopics. Rom-coms are a historically
overlooked category at the Oscars and subsequently get deprioritized. And consumers have also
seemed to care less
1230.00 - 1260.00: about mid-budget movies too, for whatever the reason. But I assume it's a mix of
movie ticket prices being high, the fact that streamers
tend to pick up movies within a month after they
complete their theater runs, which makes people even less incentivized to go to the theater, or again, the fact that
there's too many shows and movies available in general. And we all get decision fatigue (laughing) And by the time we decide, "Yeah, we'll watch that movie, it's already run its
whole theater course." Either way, mid-budget movies aren't doing well (laughing)
for the most part. As another example,
reporter Samuel Rosenthal
1260.00 - 1290.00: looked at the movies "The Holdovers," which released in 2023, and "Dead Poets Society," which released in 1989. These reviews are not just comparable in terms of subject matter, but also had about the same budget between production costs
and distribution costs. Both were about $40 million when adjusted for inflation, and had similarly glowing reviews, with multiple Oscar nominations. However, "Dead Poets Society" went on to earn over $500 million when adjusted for inflation, while "The Holdovers" only earned $43 million,
1290.00 - 1320.00: not even enough to be profitable due to the 2.5 times rule. The 2.5 times rule is a typical rule for profitability in Hollywood by the way. Basically the movie needs to
earn at 2.5 times the budget to be considered profitable because production budgets don't include marketing costs and theater revenue shares. There have been, of course, some mid-budget films that have done well, like Ryan Johnson's "Knives Out," which was produced on a $40 million budget and made $311 million, and Jordan Peels' "Us," produced on a $20 million budget,
1320.00 - 1350.00: making $255 million, but not enough of them to
revive mid-budget cinema. For reference, from 1996 to 2001, 36% of films had budgets between $15 and $65 million. This number plummeted between
2016 to 2021 to only 5%. Matt Damon has talked at length about the disappearance of these films because they were the ones
to initially jumpstart and sustain his career. In a "New York Times" feature, he said that his bread and butter were the movies made on a
$20 to $70 million budget.
1350.00 - 1380.00: Similarly, when I was reading up about these '90s rom-coms, while many of them ended up
recycling the same actors, they also catapulted those actors into stardom to begin with. - I thought we were
gonna be friends forever. (cicadas chirping)
We're not? - No. We're not gonna be
friends anymore, Debbie. (mouse clicking) (paper crumpling) (upbeat music)
(keys clacking)
1380.00 - 1410.00: - Unlike '90s Hollywood stars who profited from the public's interest in mid-budget cinema and rom-coms, rom-coms today are no longer seen as star-making vehicles. Kyle Buchanan reported
for Vulture in 2017, "New recruits to the Lady,
a-list, like Margot Robbie, Brie Larson and Shailene Woodley, have no romantic comedies on their docket. For years, this was a genre
that would mint superstars, and now young women are
content to bypass it entirely." Buchanan continues to point out that rather than churning out mainstream Hollywood movies for ages until finally getting
picked up by big directors,
1410.00 - 1440.00: a la Sandra Bullock, young Hollywood actresses are instead focusing on getting cast in these serious high-art movies as soon as possible in their careers. He notes Jennifer
Lawrence's breakthrough role was the indie movie "Winter's Bone," which landed her her
first Oscar nomination, and Margot Robbie's breakthrough role was a Martin Scorsese movie. More recently, I think Cailee
Spaeny's breakthrough role was a Sofia Coppola's "Priscilla." Male actors have also
been rom-com avoidant. Earlier this year, Kate
Hudson went on "The View"
1440.00 - 1470.00: to talk about how difficult it is to recruit big male actors into the genre because they would rather go down the lucrative action hero route. For example, Chris Evans and Mark Ruffalo, who both had a repertoire of rom-coms before their Marvel contracts, and have not revisited the rom-com since. I don't necessarily blame any
of these actors by the way. I think almost anyone would
prefer a high-paying movie role over a low-paying one. And if you do take a lower pay, you would hope the movie
would be serious enough to at least get picked up by award season,
1470.00 - 1500.00: which would make it worth it. It's just sort of like sad that rom-coms, which have once formed the
backbone of entertainment since like Shakespeare's Globe, have become so unpopular and
un-prestigious over time. So without any new a-listers
interested in the genre, the mid-budget movie won't be able to justify
a theatrical release, which is how we get
movies like "Marry Me," "Ticket to Paradise," "Shotgun Wedding," "The Lost City," and "Maybe I Do," which has leaned on casting previous generation's rom-com movie stars
1500.00 - 1530.00: to generate buzz. With the exception of "The Lost City," these movies were more or
less panned by critics though. Kate Hudson mentioned
that the main problem with modern rom-coms is the declining quality of its writing. - You should put some ice on your balls. - You should put some ice on my balls. - Okay. (laughing) - [Mina] That's not to say
that the writing of the '90s and 2000s was perfect. A lot of the grievances (laughing) with the genre people overlook because of nostalgia reasons. - It's turkey time. - Huh? - Gobble, gobble.
1530.00 - 1560.00: - What?
- I actually remember, there was a lot of anti rom-com fervor in the early 2010s when online culture became obsessed with
feminist media critique. So for example, Lindy West
published a really popular essay on Jezebel in 2013 titled "I Re-Watched 'Love Actually' and I'm Here to Ruin It for All of You." In it, she writes a take down of virtually (laughing) every storyline. Here's an example. So you know the scene when Andrew Lincoln is holding up his cue cards declaring his love for Keira Knightley? West writes about it, "That best man guy shows up
at Keira Knightley's house
1560.00 - 1590.00: and spawns a decade of nice
guy emotional manipulation reframed as romance. And Keira Knightley fucking
kisses him for it." (laughing) I mean, she's right. (laughing) Journalist Chris Eggerten
wrote in a 2015 piece that counted down 11
offensive cliches in rom-coms, "Mostly I think we just got tired of living the baby boomer fantasy of ideal romantic love, propagated in large part by the society's un-progressive
cultural expectations regarding gender roles." But by the late 2010, most of the internet soured
1590.00 - 1620.00: on these kinds of
virtue-signaling critiques, maybe in the face of larger problems, like COVID and Trump's presidency, but online discourse over
media from 20 years ago started to feel pointless or nitpicky. What I've realized with my own viewing is that dating life has
changed so much since the '90s. I mean, life has changed
so much since the '90s. So watching these movies for me is like watching a
period piece. (laughing) We can appreciate them
for their time period. The music, the costumes, and the silly dating conventions.
1620.00 - 1650.00: You can only enjoy them if you view them as truly escapist media. And they're so escapist (laughing) because the
problem that they deal with, probably by virtue of the characters being white and upper-middle class, are basically non-problems and they don't remind us of
the 2020s' daily stresses, like climate change and
health insurance payments. This isn't to say these romantic comedies couldn't be realistic and still relevant, as Haaniyah Angus writes for "Dazed," "'When Harry Met Sally' prides itself on examining love and the
complexities of relationships, but it never attempts to
belittle its viewers."
1650.00 - 1680.00: In comparison, she
criticizes "Anyone But You" for its cynical self-awareness
of rom-com tropes that would be, quote, "Unbearable for even
the most devoted fan." I actually disagree with this
take on "Anyone But You," which by the way ended
up making a gross revenue of $100.2 million worldwide. I personally didn't love the movie, but every time I see a
movie get received so well, I kind of go back and reevaluate it and try to understand why it did so well. And the thing is, I think that if you went into the movie with a genuine hope
1680.00 - 1710.00: that this was going to be the
greatest rom-com of all time, it'll flop. (laughing) But if you go into the movie wanting to just have fun, then it can be a great time. For me, the tropes were put
in there less to be cynical and more to be campy
and purposely unserious, sort of similar to "Mama Mia!" If "Anyone But You" came
out at the same time as "When Harry Met Sally," trust, I think it would've
bombed at the box office, the writing was totally off and the approach to love didn't really feel genuine, but "Anyone But You" resonated
1710.00 - 1740.00: because it was paying homage to previously great movies that we miss and don't have anymore. And in a similar vein, I don't even know if Nora Ephron movies would hit the same way
today if they came out because of changing attitudes towards love and relationships. They would probably feel dated and people would be like, "What is this?" For a rom-com to really hit now, at least for me, it has to acknowledge that audiences are aware of the stereotypical cheesiness associated with the genre, and the writers have to either skew more into the romdramedy genre.
1740.00 - 1770.00: So that's romance, drama and comedy. Like with "Silver Linings Playbook" and "The Big Sick." or go full throttle into the cheesy fun, like with "Mama Mia!" When researching, I read a lot of essays about how the rom-com
genre can save itself by pivoting to more diverse couples, with "Crazy Rich Asians" being used as a prime example. This movie came out I think in like 2018, and it became the highest-grossing rom-com in a very long time. And yes, while I think there's definitely
1770.00 - 1800.00: an opening for more
representation in the genre, I personally love to see it, I actually think what
made "Crazy Rich Asians" especially memorable and well liked is the fact that it was
a romdramedy. (laughing) It had similar comedic beats to a typical rom-com, but it was less naive in its
depiction of relationships and arrived at its
happily-ever-after conclusion in a more organic and realistic way. "The Idea of You" also
leaned into romdramedy with the second half of the movie totally darker than the first half.
1800.00 - 1830.00: Miss Anne could not catch a break (laughing) in the second
half of that movie. And I don't wanna spoil this one because it's relatively new, the ending, it does take a little suspension of disbelief, right? But I do think that for the most part it was kind of portrayed as realistically as any kind of (laughing) cute, age-gap, celebrity fan
fiction could be. (laughing) And I think that if
they cast worse actors, it would've just totally been
lost to the sands of time.
1830.00 - 1860.00: So this quote by writer Toju also resonates with me deeply, "The focus on making realistic rom-coms can kill the romance in a way, but that might just be a
reflection of dating nowadays, which is inherently less earnest, less romantic and less vulnerable." So a few years ago, researchers at SUNY Buffalo analyzed 188 romantic comedy scripts that were produced between 1980 and 2019 to see how the genre has changed over time and what it might say about
Americans' views on love.
1860.00 - 1890.00: One of the more interesting
trends they found was that the relationship
we see in the movie theater are increasingly grounded in conflict, mixed feelings and uneasiness. I don't think less naive
dating stories are bad. As I said, "Crazy Rich
Asians" popped off. (laughing) But I think making a romdramedy requires more thought and tonal balance, which is difficult to execute because if the ending skews too happy, it might feel forced and unnatural. But if it skews too cynical,
1890.00 - 1920.00: then it becomes too
depressing for viewers. And after all, as we said, most people watch rom-coms as an escape from the challenges of life, particularly dating life. We don't wanna see
anything that depressing (laughing) if we're looking for an escape. Speaking of, it is no secret that there's a lot of
dating pessimism these days with the lack of third spaces and the advent of app-swiping hell. Users also regularly share their bad dating story times and post-cringe Hinge profiles they come across on TikTok, which (laughing) while entertaining, doesn't help the general
outlook on things.
1920.00 - 1950.00: Asa Seresin coined the term
heteropessimism in 2019 to mean performative disaffiliation
with heterosexuality, usually expressed in the form of regret, embarrassment or hopelessness about straight experience. He explains how it thrives on
social media in particular. "Much of Gen Z may have learned norms about dating and sex from social media before actually participating. I think the results of that is not that you end up
making all the right choices and not being disappointed, it's that you actually end up having
1950.00 - 1980.00: this very heavily mediated
experience of the world, where everything that you experience is kind of always being played
back in this meta-narrative that you're getting from social media." I would argue that dating pessimism, while definitely big for straight people, has reached everyone
(laughing) at this point. But some hopefuls believe
that these circumstances will at the very least revive
the rom-com genre again. (laughing) Everyone might
be lonely and depressed, but at least we have
better movies. (laughing)
1980.00 - 2010.00: Actress Malin Akerman Told "Parade," I think people need a bit
more lightheartedness. We need some escapism, joy and love and romance. Human connection has been really lost for the past couple years in the pandemic. I can understand why studios
are investing in that." I mean, last summer, the term, "Delulu," went mainstream (laughing)
among online millennials and zoomers as a rally
for self-empowerment and believing the impossible. And also, going back to my joke, I don't mean to say that
the pursuit of rom-coms
2010.00 - 2040.00: is a kind of minor pursuit. I actually think that bringing
joy is really important, especially in our time. As I was alluding to, when people watch all these really negative
tiktoks about dating, it kind of infiltrates your brain space and it makes you more pessimistic. Whereas I think if people are
exposed to happier plot lines and successful experiences, especially if they're
more rooted in realism, which is the trend that I
see for rom-coms these days,
2040.00 - 2070.00: I think that it can be very
uplifting and inspiring, and can only do good. Anyways, (laughing) also, like with fashion trends, movie trends have also been cyclical. The 1960s and 1980s were years
of blockbuster boom and bust, while the 1970s and 1990s were years of director-driven indies. Steven Spielberg predicted
the blockbuster cycle would end at some point, and referenced his prophecy in
a 2013 speech he gave at USC, in which he said, "There's eventually
going to be an implosion
2070.00 - 2100.00: or a big meltdown, there's going to be an implosion where three, or four, or maybe even a half
dozen mega-budget movies are going to go crashing into the ground and that's going to change the paradigm." Spielberg couldn't predict how streaming, the pandemic, and writer and
actor strikes would factor in, but it is interesting that
the tide seems to be shifting. For example, Disney CEO Bob Iger has acknowledged some
blockbuster stagnation, saying that Marvel will stick with releasing just three movies a year. And some of last year's
mid-budget films like "Civil War,"
2100.00 - 2130.00: "Anyone But You" and "Elvis" turned into surprise box office hits. Austin Goslin reported for Polygon that at CinemaCon 2024, an annual trade show where
industry leaders meet to discuss the state of movie going, that more than once presenters from studios or theater owners mentioned the speech given
at last year's Academy Awards by American fiction
writer, Cord Jefferson. Accepting the award, he said. - Instead of making
one $200 million movie, try making 20 $10 million movies. (audience cheering and clapping) Or 50, right, 50 $4 million movies.
2130.00 - 2160.00: (upbeat music)
(keys clacking) - Here is how rom-coms
can still win. (laughing) My historical analysis is that movies tend to reflect audience attitudes. Similar to how screwball comedies were salves during the Great Depression and among increasing divorce rates, I think everyone's appetite for an escapist rom-com is increasing. And Hollywood will have
to start delivering.
2160.00 - 2190.00: While zoomers have the reputation for being the nihilistic generation, I don't actually believe
nihilism is sustainable because it's exhausting, and what I predict is
that we'll start to see more rational optimism take hold among younger people, aka, this idea that while things are bad, we've realized that being pessimistic actually burns us out more, and we'll shift to being optimistic because it just feels better, (laughing) which rom-coms will feed into. Also, with how unsustainable
the streaming model is, which you can hear me rant about it
2190.00 - 2220.00: in my streaming video, studios will pivot their energies more into producing movies rather than a billion TV shows. And not to shit on streaming, I think we've gotten some
pretty notable rom-coms that premiered straight to streaming in the past couple years, specifically "To All the
Boys I've Loved Before," which I loved. I didn't really love the sequel or the third movie, but the first movie was great, which speaking of, it was based on a book, and I think the rom-com renaissance will be frontline by more
book-to-movie adaptations
2220.00 - 2250.00: because of the popularity of book talk that can be mobilized as
a marketing mechanism, and also because IP in
general is less risk taking than developing a completely new script. We saw this happen with "To All the Boys," "Crazy Rich Asians," "Red White & Royal
Blue," "The Idea of You," and at the time of writing this, "It Ends With Us" just hit theaters. Though I think "It Ends With Us" is just a straight romantic
drama and not a comedy. Even though "Bridgerton" is a TV series, I think its success also speaks to how profitable a
book adaptation can be.
2250.00 - 2280.00: So overall I'm hopeful because we are embracing
rational optimism these days. And yeah, okay, guys, thanks so much for listening. Thanks for sticking around
to the end of this video. If you have a favorite rom-com, please let me know, I'd love to hear it. My hypothesis, so don't prove me wrong, is that "When Harry Met Sally" will be the most popular
(laughing) comment below. But yeah, I am interested. And if you really wanna
defend "Sleepless in Seattle"
2280.00 - 2310.00: and "You've Got Mail" to me, feel free to do that. I probably won't change my mind. Also, if you liked "You've Got Mail," I highly recommend "The
Shop Around the Corner," which is what "You've
Got Mail" was based on, and it's a 1940 movie. It has Jimmy Stewart, who is, love Jimmy. (laughing) And it's not a screwball comedy, it's actually very sincere and earnest, it is a romantic comedy. And it's also kind of a Christmas movie 'cause Christmas features in there.
2310.00 - 2340.00: But I really loved it, it's one of my favorite older movies, and I highly recommend watching it. Okay, I'll talk to you all next time. See ya later. Have a good one. Bye-bye. (laughing)